# Internationalization (i18n)

We built this application with internationalization in mind. This documentation will explain the different components 
that help us with that task and how they interact.

[I don't need i18n!](#i-dont-need-i18n)

## Default locale

Both the `webapp` and `api` services read the `DEFAULT_LOCALE` environment variable.

Its value comes from the root `.env` file.

If you update this value, you will have to restart these services (locally by doing `make down up`).

Also, don't forget to update the file [.env.dist](../.env.dist) if this change is definitive.

## API

For the API, *i18n* has three goals:

1. Translate the validation error messages.
2. Translate the emails.
3. Translate the spreadsheets.

We use the [symfony/translation](https://symfony.com/doc/current/translation.html) package.

**Note:** it requires the PHP extension `intl`, already configured in the `api` service.

### Basic usage

Symfony provides a `TranslatorInterface` you can inject in your class, i.e.:

```php
private TranslatorInterface $translator;

public function __construct(
    TranslatorInterface $translator
) {
    $this->translator = $translator;
}
```

You can then use it as below:

```php
$translatedSubject = $this->translator
    ->trans(
        'translation_key',
        [],
        'the_domain', // More on that later.
        'the_locale'
    );
```

**Note:** most of the time, you don't have to use the `TranslatorInterface` as either Symfony or the parent class call
it for you.

### Translations folder

Folder [src/api/translations](../src/api/translations) contains one YAML file per locale and domain.

A domain is a sort of scope. For instance, [src/api/translations/emails.en.yaml](../src/api/translations/emails.en.yaml) 
and [src/api/translations/emails.fr.yaml](../src/api/translations/emails.fr.yaml) are both for the `email` domain 
(used for translating emails!).

Each of these files contains translation keys and the associated texts.

For instance:

```yaml
foo:
  baz: "Hello"
```

**All files from the same domain should have the same organization (same translations keys, identical sorting, etc.).**

### Validation error messages

Let's say you have a class with the following validation annotations:

```php
# src/Domain/Model/User.php

/**
 * @Field
 * @Assert\NotBlank(message="not_blank")
 * @Assert\Length(max=255, maxMessage="max_length_255")
 */
public function getFirstName(): string
{
    return parent::getFirstName();
}
```

The `message` property of each `Assert` annotation is a translation key from the `validators` domain.

```yaml
# translations/validators.en.yaml
not_blank: "This value should not be blank."
max_length_255: "This value is too long. It should have 255 characters or less."

# translations/validators.fr.yaml
not_blank: "Cette valeur ne doit pas être vide."
max_length_255: "Cette valeur est trop longue. Elle doit avoir 255 caractères ou moins."
```

The web application implements a mechanism for setting the correct locale to translate these validation error
messages (see [interactions between the web application and the API chapter](#interactions-between-the-web-application-and-the-api)).

### Emails

Emails translation uses the `emails` domain.

The [src/api/src/UseCase/CreateEmail](../src/api/src/UseCase/CreateEmail.php) use case has a method `create`, which takes, 
among other arguments, a [src/api/src/Domain/Model/User](../src/api/src/Domain/Model/User.php) and the translation key 
of the email's subject. The [User](../src/api/src/Domain/Model/User.php) has a `locale` property used for 
translating both the email's subject and its content.

See the [emails](emails.md) documentation for more details on how to extend this use case.

The Twig templates of your emails should look like this:

```twig
{% extends 'emails/email.html.twig' %}
{% trans_default_domain domain %}

{% block body %}
    {% apply inky_to_html|inline_css(source('@css/foundation-emails.css'), source('@css/emails.css')) %}
        <h1>{% trans into locale %}translation_key{% endtrans %}</h1>
   {% endapply %}
{% endblock %}
```

The [CreateEmail](../src/api/src/UseCase/CreateEmail.php) use case provides both `domain` and `locale` values.

### Spreadsheets

Spreadsheets translation uses the `spreadsheets` domain.

You might want to translate the headers and cell values of your XLSX exports. 
See [src/api/src/UseCase/CreateXLSXExport](../src/api/src/UseCase/CreateXLSXExport.php) 
and [src/api/src/UseCase/User/CreateUsersXLSXExport](../src/api/src/UseCase/User/CreateUsersXLSXExport.php)
use cases for more details.

## Web application

For the web application, *i18n* has two goals:

1. Translate the user interface.
2. Tell the API which locale the user has selected (for validations errors, etc.).

We use the [nuxt/i18n](https://i18n.nuxtjs.org/) module, and we configured it in 
the [src/webapp/nuxt.config.js](../src/webapp/nuxt.config.js) file.

### Basic usage

In your `<template>` blocks:

```js
<template>
  <button>
    {{ $t('a_translation_key') }}
  </button>
</template>
```

In your Vue components:

```js
this.$t('a_translation_key')
```

### Locales folder

Folder [src/webapp/locales](../src/webapp/locales) contains one JavaScript file per locale.

Each of these files exports an object with translation keys and the associated texts.

For instance:

```js
export default {
  foo: {
    baz: 'Hello',
  },
}
```

**All files should have the same organization (same translations keys, identical sorting, etc.).**

It would be best to organize the translations keys according to the file's path where you've put them. 
If the file content is lengthy, append the most relevant component from the `<template>` block.

For instance:

```js
// pages/login.vue
<template>
  <form>
    <button>
      {{ $t('pages.login.form.submit') }}
    </button>
  </form>
</template>

// locales/en.js
export default {
  pages: {
    login: {
      form: {
        submit: 'Send',
      },
    },
  },
}

// locales/fr.js
export default {
  pages: {
    login: {
      form: {
        submit: 'Envoyer',
      },
    },
  },
}
```

If you are using the same translations in different files, you may put them under the `common` key:

```js
export default {
  common: {
    first_name: 'First name',
    last_name: 'Last name',
    email: 'Email',
    locale: 'Locale',
    role: 'Role',
  },
}
```

### Browser language detection

The first time the user lands on your application's root pages (`/x`, but not `/x/y`), it automatically detects the 
browser language and sets the cookie `i18n_redirected` with the corresponding locale. 

If your application does not support the browser language, it uses the default locale instead.

Next time the user lands on your application, it will use cookie `i18n_redirected`'s value to translate the 
user interface to the correct locale automatically (and redirect the user to the right path - see below).

### Routing

The router prefixes all routes with the locale. For instance, the login page is available on the paths `/en/login` and
`/fr/login`.

Wherever you need to push a route in your router, use the global method `localePath({ name: 'route_name' })`.

In your `<template>` blocks:

```js
<template>
  <b-link :to="localePath({ name: 'reset-password', query: { email: form.email } })">
    {{ $t('pages.login.form.forgot_password_link') }}
  </b-link>
</template>
```

In your Vue components:

```js
this.$router.push(this.localePath({ name: 'index' }))
```

If you don't know the name of your route, take a look at the file `src/webapp/.nuxt/router.js`. For instance:

```js
{
  path: "/fr/update-password/:id?/:token",
  component: _8474331c,
  name: "update-password-id-token___fr"
}
```

The name of the route here is `update-password-id-token`.

### Update the locale

In the file [src/webapp/components/layouts/Header.vue](../src/webapp/components/layouts/Header.vue), you have 
an example of how to update the locale.

Here calling `switchLocalePath` will update the current locale in the `i18n` store (from nuxt-i18n), 
plus the value of the cookie `i18_redirected`. It will also redirect the user to the correct route.

Our custom plugin [src/webapp/plugins/i18n.js](../src/webapp/plugins/i18n.js) hooks itself on these events for:

1. Updating the HTTP header `Accept-Language` for next GraphQL requests (more on that in the next chapter).
2. Updating the user's locale in the database if authenticated.

**Note:** we configured nuxt-i18n to lazy load the locales files, meaning it will only load the current locale file 
instead of all locales files.

## Interactions between the web application and the API

There are three ways for communicating the user locale from the web application to the API:

1. Requests with `Accept-Language` HTTP header.
2. Query parameters when you cannot set the previous HTTP header (links, for instance).
3. Update the user's locale via a GraphQL request if authenticated.
4. Update the user's locale on login if the web application locale is not the same as the locale from the API

### `Accept-Language` HTTP header

Each time the user changes its locale on the web application, the [i18n.js](../src/webapp/plugins/i18n.js) plugin will 
update the HTTP header `Accept-Language` for the next GraphQL requests with the new value.

The [src/api/src/Infrastructure/EventSubscriber/LocaleSubscriber](../src/api/src/Infrastructure/EventSubscriber/LocaleSubscriber.php) 
from the API reads the value of this HTTP header to set the locale on its side.

Use case: translating the validation error messages.

### Query parameters

In some use cases, you cannot set an HTTP header. For instance, when the user clicks on a link, you will have to use
query parameters:

```
http://foo.bar/?locale=fr
```

In the application, we use this solution for XLSX exports:

* [src/webapp/pages/admin/users/index.vue](../src/webapp/pages/admin/users/index.vue)
* [src/api/src/Infrastructure/Controller/User/UsersXLSXExportController.php](../src/api/src/Infrastructure/Controller/User/UsersXLSXExportController.php)

### GraphQL request

As explained before, whenever an authenticated user changes the locale on the web application, we run the 
`UpdateLocale` GraphQL mutation to update the `locale` property of the corresponding row of the
 `users` table (reminder: this property helps to know in which locale the API has to translate emails for this user).
 
See:

* [src/webapp/plugins/i18n.js](../src/webapp/plugins/i18n.js) plugin
* [src/api/src/UseCase/User/UpdateLocale.php](../src/api/src/UseCase/User/UpdateLocale.php)

We also call the `UpdateLocale` GraphQL mutation on page [src/webapp/pages/login.vue](../src/webapp/pages/login.vue) 
in the specific scenario where the web application locale is not the same as the user's locale from the API.

# I don't need i18n

No problem! Remove the web application's locale selection ([src/webapp/components/layouts/Header.vue](../src/webapp/components/layouts/Header.vue))
and set the `DEFAULT_LOCALE` environment variable with your unique locale (see [default locale](#default-locale) chapter).

---

[Back to top](#internationalization-i18n) - [Home](../README.md)